New Patterns chapter (#489)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/patterns/reference.adoc

* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expressions]
* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#property-key-value-expressions[property key-value expressions] 
* xref:clauses/where.adoc[WHERE clauses]

The boolean expression of the `WHERE` clause can reference any variables within scope of the node pattern.
A node variable needs to be declared in the node pattern in order to reference it in the boolean expression.

If no predicates are specified, then the node pattern matches any node.

[[node-patterns-rules-variable-binding]]
==== Variable binding

If a variable has not been declared elsewhere in the query, it will become bound to nodes when the matching of its containing path pattern is executed.
If it has been bound in a previous clause, then no new nodes will be bound to the variable; any previously bound nodes that do not match in the current path pattern will lead to the match being eliminated from the results. 
See the section on xref:clauses/clause_composition.adoc[clause composition] for more details on the passing of results between clauses.

[[node-patterns-examples]]
=== Examples 

Matches all nodes with the label `Station`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:Station)

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all nodes with the label `A` and binds them to the variable n:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n:A)
----
```

From a suggestion from VM: make labels consistently single letters, and add a variable binding example.

Matches all nodes with the label `Stop` and a property `departs` with the `time` value `11:11`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:Stop { departs: time("11:11") })

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all nodes with the label `B` and a property `departs` with the `time` value `11:11`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:B { departs: time("11:11") })
----
```

Matches all nodes with the property `departs` with a value equal to the current time plus 30 minutes:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n WHERE n.departs > time() + duration("PT30M"))
----

[[relationship-patterns]]
== Relationship patterns

A relationship pattern is a pattern that matches a single relationship.
It can only be used with node patterns on either side of it.

A relationship pattern followed immediately by a quantifier is an abbreviated xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-path-patterns[quantified path pattern] called a xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-relationships[quantified relationship].

See also xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#relationship-patterns[relationship pattern concepts].

[[relationship-patterns-syntax]]
=== Syntax 

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
relationshipPattern ::= fullPattern | abbreviatedRelationship

fullPattern ::= 
    "<-[" patternFiller "]-" 
  | "-[" patternFiller "]->"
  | "-[" patternFiller "]-"

abbreviatedRelationship ::= "<--" | "--" | "-->"

patternFiller ::= [ relationshipVariable ] [ typeExpression ] 
    [ propertyKeyValueExpression ] [ "WHERE" booleanExpression ]
----

> Note that the syntax for type expressions in relationship patterns is the same as for label expressions in node patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the syntax for type expressions in relationship patterns is the same as for label expressions in node patterns (although unlike node labels, relationships must have exactly one type).
```

Late suggestion to remind the reader of this other important difference between node labels and relationship types.

For rules on valid relationship variable names, see the xref:syntax/naming.adoc[Cypher naming rules].

[[relationship-patterns-rules]]
=== Rules

[[relationship-patterns-rules-predicates]]
==== Predicates

The following three types of predicate can be specified in the pattern filler of a full relationship pattern (i.e. a pattern with the square brackets):

* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expression]
* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#property-key-value-expressions[property key-value expression] 

> * xref:clauses/where.adoc[WHERE clauses]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expressions]
* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#property-key-value-expressions[property key-value expressions] 
* xref:clauses/where.adoc[WHERE clauses]
```

If a relationship pattern has no arrows, it will match relationships of any direction. 

The boolean expression of the `WHERE` clause can reference any variables within scope of the relationship pattern.
A relationship variable needs to be declared in the pattern in order to reference it in the boolean expression.

If no predicates are specified then the pattern matches all relationships.

[[relationship-patterns-rules-variable-binding]]
==== Variable binding

If the variable has not been declared elsewhere in the query, it will become bound to relationships when the matching of its containing path pattern is executed.
If it has been bound in a previous clause, then no new relationships will be bound to the variable; if any previously bound relationships do not match in the current path pattern, then those matches will be eliminated from the results.

See the chapter on xref:clauses/clause_composition.adoc[clause composition] for more details on the passing of results between clauses.

[[relationship-patterns-examples]]
=== Examples 

Matches all relationships with the type `A`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[:A]->()

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all relationships with the type `R` and binds them to the variable `r`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[r:R]->()
----
```

Moving binding to variable here for symmetry with the node patterns section, and normalising the relationship types to be R, S ...

Matches all relationships and binds them to variable `r`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[r]->()

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all relationships with type `R` and property `distance` equal to `100`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[:R {distance: 100}]->()
----
```

More changes to be symmetrical with node patterns.

Matches all relationships with the type `CALLS_AT` and the property `p` set to between `10` and `100`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[r:CALLS_AT WHERE 10 < r.p < 100]->()

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all relationships where property `distance` is between `10` and `100`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[r WHERE 10 < r.distance < 100]->()
----
```

More symmetry and consistent.

> Matches all relationships with label `A` nodes as their source, and nodes with label `B` as their target:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all relationships that connect nodes with label `A` as their source and nodes with label `B` as their target:
```

[[label-expressions-rules]]
=== Rules

The following table lists the symbols used in label expressions:

[options="header",cols="a,3a,a"]
|===
| Symbol | Description | Precedence

| `%` 
| Wildcard.
Evaluates to `true` if the label set is non-empty 
| 

| `()`
| Contained expression is evaluated before evaluating the outer expression the group is contained in. 
| 1 (highest)

| `!`
| Negation
| 2

| `&`
| Conjunction
| 3

| `&#124;` 
| Disjunction
| 4 (lowest)

|===

Associativity is left-to-right.

[[label-expressions-examples]]
=== Examples

In the following table, a tick is shown where the label expression matches the node with the labels shown: 

|===

| 8+^|  *Node* 
|*Node pattern*
|`()`
|`(:A)`
|`(:B)`
|`(:C)`
|`(:A:B)`
|`(:A:C)`
|`(:B:C)`
|`(:A:B:C)`

|`()` | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705;

|`(:A)` | | &#x2705; | | | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | | &#x2705;

|`(:A&B)` | | | | | &#x2705; | | | &#x2705;

|`(:A&#124;B)` | | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705;

|`(:!A)` | &#x2705; | | &#x2705; | &#x2705;| | | &#x2705; | 

|`(:!!A)` | | &#x2705; | | | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | | &#x2705;

> |`(:A&!A)` | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705;

Reviewer: This looks like it should be the tautology `(:A|!A)`.

The row for `(:A&!A)` looks like it is missing.

|`(:%)` | | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705;

|`(:!%)` | &#x2705; | | | | | | | 

|`(:%&#124;!%)` | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705;

> | `(:%&!%)` | | | | | | | | 

Reviewer: Maybe it is better so have `(:A&!A)` to illustrate a contradiction that can't be satisfied? (I know it's included above but that looks like it was supposed to be `(:A|!A)`).

| `(:A&%)` | | &#x2705; | | | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | | &#x2705;

| `(:A&#124;%)` | | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705; | &#x2705;

| `(:(A&B)&!(B&C))` | | | | | &#x2705; | | | 

> | `(:!(A&%)&%)` | | |  &#x2705;  |  &#x2705;  | | |  &#x2705; | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `(:!A&%)` | | |  &#x2705;  |  &#x2705;  | | |  &#x2705; | 
```
Let's simplify this rather than make it a silly puzzle for the reader.

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[:A&B]->
----

Similarly, the following will always match a relationship:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[:%]->
----

The use of negation can make the conjunction useful in relationship patterns. 
The following matches relationships that have type that is neither `A` nor `B`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
-[:!A&!B]->
----

[[property-key-value-expressions]]
== Property key-value expressions

[[property-key-value-expressions-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
propertyKeyValueExpression ::= 
  "{" propertyKeyValuePairList "}"

propertyKeyValuePairList ::= 
  propertyKeyValuePair [ "," propertyKeyValuePair ]

propertyKeyValuePair ::= propertyName ":" valueExpression
----

[[property-key-value-expressions-rules]]
=== Rules

The property key-value expression is treated as a conjunction of equalities on the properties of the element that the containing pattern matches. 

For example, the following node pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
({ p: valueExp1, q: valueExp2 })
----

is equivalent to the following node pattern with a `WHERE` clause:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n WHERE n.p = valueExp1 AND n.q = valueExp2)
----

> The value expression can be any expression as listed in the chapter on xref:syntax/expressions.adoc[Expressions], except for path patterns (which will throw a syntax error) and regular expressions (which will be treated as string literals).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value expression can be any expression as listed in the chapter on xref:syntax/expressions.adoc[expressions], except for path patterns (which will throw a syntax error) and regular expressions (which will be treated as string literals).
```

An empty property key-value expression matches all elements.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An empty property key-value expression matches all elements.

Property key-value expressions can be combined with a `WHERE` clause.
```
This rule was in the `Examples`. It makes more sense to have it here.

[[property-key-value-expressions-examples]]
=== Examples

> The following matches all nodes with property `p` = `10`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all nodes with property `p` = `10`:
```
Style matches examples in other section e.g. `Node patterns`.

[source, role=noheader]
----
({ p: 10 })
----

> The following matches all relationships with property `p` = `10` and `q` equal to date `2023-02-10`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all relationships with property `p` = `10` and `q` equal to date `2023-02-10`:
```

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[{ p: 10, q: date("2023-02-10") }]-()
----

> The following matches all relationships with its property `p` equal to the property `p` of its source node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all relationships with its property `p` equal to the property `p` of its source node:
```

[source, role=noheader]
----
(s)-[{ p: s.p }]-()
----

Property key-value expressions can be combined with a `WHERE` clause.

> The following matches all nodes with property `p` = 10 and property `q` greater than `100`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches all nodes with property `p` = 10 and property `q` greater than `100`:
```
Moving the rule up to `Rules`.

----

[[path-patterns]]
== Path patterns

A path pattern is the top level pattern that is matched against paths in a graph.

[[path-patterns-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
pathPattern ::= [{ simplePathPattern | quantifiedPathPattern }]+
simplePathPattern ::= nodePattern 
  [ { relationshipPattern | quantifiedRelationship } nodePattern ]*
----

[[path-patterns-rules]]
=== Rules

The minimum number of elements in the path pattern must be greater than zero.
For example, a path pattern that is a quantified path pattern with a quantifier that has a lower bound of zero is not allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
((n)-[r]->(m)){0,10}
----

A path pattern must always begin and end with a node pattern.
The following is not allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n)-[r]->(m)-[s]-
----

A path pattern may be composed of a concatenation of simple and quantified path patterns.
Two simple path patterns, however, may not be placed next to each other.
For example, the following is not allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a)<-[s]-(b) (c)-[t]->(d)
----

When a path pattern is matched to paths in a graph, nodes can be revisited but relationships cannot.

> See xref::patterns/reference.adoc#graph-patterns[graph patterns] for rules onb declaring variables multiple times. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See xref::patterns/reference.adoc#graph-patterns[graph patterns] for rules on declaring variables multiple times. 
```

[[path-patterns-examples]]
=== Examples

A single node pattern is allowed as it has at least one element:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n)
----

A simple path pattern with more than one element:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a:A)<-[{p: 30}]-(b)-[t WHERE t.q > 0]->(c:C)
----

A quantified path pattern can have a lower bound of zero in its quantifier as long as it abuts other patterns that have at least one element:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> (:A) ((:X)-[:R]-()) *(:B)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(:A) ((:X)-[:R]-()){0,10} (:B)
```
Quantifier should be attached to the parenthesised path pattern. 

Replacing Kleene star and keeping its peculiarities localised to the table of quantifier semantics.

----

A quantified relationship can also have a lower bound of zero as long as the overall path pattern has at least one element:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> (:A)-[:R]->*(:B)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(:A)-[:R]->{0,10}(:B)
```
Avoiding Kleene star, as above.

----

A concatenation of simple and quantified path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a)<-[s]-(b)-[t]->(c) ((n)-[r]->(m)){0,10} (:X)
----

Referencing non-local node variable in a simple path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a)<-[s:X WHERE a.p = s.p]-(b)
----
Referencing a non-local relationship variable within a quantified path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A) ((a)<-[s:X WHERE a.p = s.p]-(b)){,5}
----

> Singleton variables bound in a previous clause can be referenced anywhere in a path pattern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A variable that was introduced in a previous clause can be referenced as long as that variable was defined outside of a quantified path pattern:
```

Avoiding the use of the term 'singleton', which hasn't been introduced elsewhere.

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n)
MATCH ()-[r WHERE r.q = n.q]-() (()<-[s:X WHERE n.p = s.p]-()){2,3}
----

[[quantified-path-patterns]]
== Quantified path patterns

_Quantified path patterns were introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A quantified path pattern represents a xref::patterns/reference.adoc#path-patterns[path pattern] repeated a number of times in a given range.
It is composed of a path pattern, representing the path section to be repeated, followed by a xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantifiers[quantifier], constraining the number of repetitions between a lower bound and an upper bound.

image::patterns_qpp_reference.svg[width="500", role="middle"]

> 

Reviewer: There was a cross-reference to variable-length relationships here. Was that removed intentionally?

Author: Mistake - will be included in next commit.

[[quantified-path-patterns-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
quantifiedPathPattern ::= 
  "(" fixedPath [ "WHERE" booleanExpression ] ")" quantifier
fixedPath ::= nodePattern [ relationshipPattern nodePattern ]+
----

[[quantified-path-patterns-rules]]
=== Rules

[[quantified-path-pattern-rules-minimum-pattern-length]]
==== Minimum pattern length

The path pattern being quantified must have a length greater than zero.
In other words, it must contain at least one relationship.
A single node pattern cannot be quantified.
For example, this is not allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
((x:A)){2,4}
----

[[quantified-path-patterns-rules-nesting]]
==== Nesting of quantified path patterns

The path pattern being quantified cannot contain a quantified path pattern, and nesting of quantified path patterns is not allowed.

> For example, the following nesting of a quantified relationship in a quantified path pattern is not allowed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nesting of quantified path patterns is not allowed. For example, the following nesting of a quantified relationship in a quantified path pattern is not allowed:
```

Remove repetition of point.

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A) (()-[:R]->+()){2,3} (:B)
----

A quantified path pattern that is part of the boolean expression within a quantified path pattern would not count as nested and is permitted. 
For example, the following is valid: 

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH ((n:A)-[:R]->({p: 30}) WHERE EXISTS { (n)-->+(:X) }){2,3}
----

[[quantified-path-patterns-rules-group-variables]]
==== Group variables

Variables introduced inside of a quantified path pattern are said to be exposed as _group variables_ outside of the definition of the pattern.
As group variables, they can be used wherever lists are used, with the difference being that they are lists of nodes or relationships.
By contrast, variables can be treated as singletons inside the quantified path pattern where they are declared.

> The difference can be seen in the following query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variables introduced inside of a quantified path pattern are said to be exposed as _group variables_ outside of the definition of the pattern. As a group variable, they will be bound to either a list of nodes or a list of relationships. By contrast, variables can be treated as singletons inside the quantified path pattern where they are declared.

The difference can be seen in the following query:
```
Removed the unnecessary contrasting between lists bound to group variable and other lists.

Note that this means that the `WHERE` clause `z.p > x.p` above needs to be inside the quantified path pattern.
The following would throw a syntax error because it is treating `z` and `p` as singletons:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH ((x)-[r]->(z)){2,3} WHERE z.p > x.p
----

It is possible, however, to position the `WHERE` clause outside of the node pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH ((x)-[r]->(z) WHERE z.p > x.p){2,3}
----

[[quantified-path-pattern-rules-matching]]
==== Matching

The mechanics of matching a quantified path pattern against paths is best explained with an example.
For the example, the following simple graph will be used:

image::patterns_qpp_reference_example.svg[width="600", role=middle"]

First, consider the following simple path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(x:A)-[:R]->(z:B WHERE z.h > 2)
----

This matches three different paths in the graph above.
The resulting bindings for `x` and `z` for each match are the following (the captions `n1` etc indicate the identity of the nodes in the diagram above):

[options="header",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| x | z

| n1 | n2 | n3
| n2 | n3 | n5 

> |===

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[options="header",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| x | z

| n1 | n2
| n2 | n3
| n3 | n5

|===
```

If the quantifier `\{2}` is affixed to the simple path pattern, the result is the following quantified path pattern:

[source, role=noheader, subs="-attributes"]
----
((x:A)-[:R]->(z:B WHERE z.h > 2)){2}
----

This is equivalent to chaining together two iterations of the pattern, where the rightmost node of the first iteration is merged with the leftmost node of the second one.

> (See xref::patterns/reference.adoc#juxtaposition[Juxtaposition] for more details.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(See xref::patterns/reference.adoc#node-pattern-pairs[node pattern pairs] for more details.)
```

[source, role=noheader]
----

> (x:A)-[:R]->(z:B WHERE z.h > 2)(x:A)-[:R]->(z:B WHERE z.h > 2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(x:A)-[:R]->(z:B WHERE z.h > 2) (x:A)-[:R]->(z:B WHERE z.h > 2)
```

----

To avoid introducing xref::patterns/reference.adoc#equijoins[equijoins] between the two instances of `x`, and between the two instances of `z`, the variables are replaced with a set of fresh variables inside each iteration:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> (x1:A)-[:R]->(z1:B WHERE z1.h > 2)(x2:A)-[:R]->(z2:B WHERE z2.h > 2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(x1:A)-[:R]->(z1:B WHERE z1.h > 2) (x2:A)-[:R]->(z2:B WHERE z2.h > 2)
```

----

> Then the juxtaposed node variables are merged:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then the node variables in adjoining node patterns are merged:
```

[source, role=noheader]
----

> (x1:A)-[:R]->({z1,x1}:A&B WHERE z1.h > 2)-[:R]->(z2:B WHERE z2.h > 2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(x1:A)-[:R]->({z1,x2}:A&B WHERE z1.h > 2)-[:R]->(z2:B WHERE z2.h > 2)
```

----

> The fact that variables `x1` and `z1` are bound to matches of the same node pattern is represented with the notation `{z1,x1}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fact that variables `x2` and `z1` are bound to matches of the same node pattern is represented with the notation `{z1,x2}`.
```

|===

Now the quantifier is changed to match lengths from 1 to 5:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH ((x:A)-[:R]->(z:B WHERE z.h > 2)){1,5}
RETURN [n in x | n.h] AS x_h, [n in z | n.h] AS z_h
----

Compared to the fixed length quantifier `\{2}`, this also matches paths of length 1 and 3, but no matches exist for length greater than 3:

[options="header",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| x_h | z_h

| [1] | [3]
| [3] | [4]
| [4] | [5]
| [1, 3] | [3, 4]
| [3, 4] | [4, 5]
| [1, 3, 4] | [3, 4, 5]

|===

[[quantified-relationships]]
== Quantified relationships

[[quantified-relationships-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
quantifiedRelationship ::= relationshipPattern quantifier
----

[[quantified-relationships-rules]]
=== Rules

A quantified relationship is an abbreviated form of a xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-path-patterns[quantified path pattern], with only a single relationship pattern specified.

For example, the following quantified relationship:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[r]->{m,n}()
----

is equivalent to the following quantified path pattern, with empty node patterns on either side:

[source, role=noheader]
----
() (()-[r]->()){m,n} ()
----

> However, Unlike a quantified path pattern, a quantified relationship must always have a node pattern on each side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, unlike a quantified path pattern, a quantified relationship must always have a node pattern on each side.
```

[[quantified-relationship-examples]]
=== Examples

> The following pattern matches paths starting with nodes labeled `A` and ending with nodes labeled `B`, that traverse between 2 and 3 relationships of type `R`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches paths starting with nodes labeled `A` and ending with nodes labeled `B`, that traverse between 2 and 3 relationships of type `R`:
```

Making style more consistent.

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[r:R]->{2,3}(:B)
----

This is equivalent to the following:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A) (()-[r:R]->()){2,3} (:B)
----

The following pattern matches cycles that include nodes that have property `p` = `$param`, and that traverse one or more relationships of any direction:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n {p: $param})--+(n)
----

This is equivalent to the following:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n {p: $param}) (()-[]-())+ (n)

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matches paths with one or more relationships of any direction and any type:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()--+()
----
```

Replacing overly complex example.

[[variable-length-relationships]]
== Variable-length relationships

Prior to the introduction of the syntax for quantified path patterns and quantified relationships, the only way in Cypher to match paths of variable length was with a variable-length relationship.
This syntax is still available.

> It is very similar to the syntax for quantified relationships, with the following differences:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is equivalent to quantified relationships, with the following differences:
```

The relationship is stronger than similarity.

* Position and syntax of quantifier.

> * Semantics of the asterisk symbol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Semantics of the asterisk symbol.
```

    [ varLengthQuantifier ] [ propertyKeyValueExpression ]

varLengthTypeExpression ::= ":" varLengthTypeTerm

varLengthTypeTerm ::=
    typeIdentifier
  | varLengthTypeTerm "|" varLengthTypeTerm

varLengthQuantifier ::= varLengthVariable | varLengthFixed

varLengthVariable ::= "*" [ [ lowerBound ] ".." [ upperBound ] ]

varLengthFixed ::= "*" fixedBound

fixedBound ::= unsignedInteger
lowerBound ::= unsignedInteger
upperBound ::= unsignedInteger
unsignedInteger ::= [0-9]+
----

For rules on valid relationship variable names, see xref:syntax/naming.adoc[Cypher naming rules].

[[variable-length-relationships-rules]]
=== Rules

The following table shows variants of the variable-length quantifier syntax and their equivalent canonical xref:patterns/reference.adoc#quantifier[quantifier] form (the form used by xref:patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-path-pattern[quantified path patterns]):

[options="header",cols="1m,1m,1a"]
|===
| *Variant* | *Canonical form* | *Description*

| * | {1,} | 1 or more iterations.

| *n | {n,n} | Exactly n iterations.

| *m..n | {m,n} | Between m and n iterations.

| *m.. | {m,} | m or more iterations.

|*..n | {1,n} | Between 1 and n iterations.

> |===

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[options="header",cols="1m,1a"]
|===
| *Variant* | *Description*

| * | 1 or more iterations.

| *n | Exactly n iterations.

| *m..n | Between m and n iterations.

| *m.. | m or more iterations.

|*..n | Between 1 and n iterations.
|===
```
The 'Canonical form' is from QPP. The 'Description' column is sufficient here.

Note that `*` used here on its own is not the same as the Kleene star (an operator that represents 0 or more repetitions), as the Kleene star has a lower bound of 0.
The above table can be used to translate the quantifier used in variable-length relationships.
The rules given for xref:patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-path-pattern[quantified path patterns] would apply to the translation.

This table shows some examples:

[options="header",cols="1m,1m"]
|===
| *Variable-length relationship* | *Equivalent quantified path pattern*

> | (a)-[*2]->(b) | (a) (()-[]->()){2,2} (b)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| (a)-[*2]\->(b) | (a) \(()-[]\->()){2,2} (b)
```

Index terms and arrow ligatures need escaping

> | (a)-[:KNOWS*3..5]->(b) | (a) (()-[:KNOWS]->()){3,5} (b)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| (a)-[:KNOWS*3..5]\->(b) | (a) \(()-[:KNOWS]\->()){3,5} (b)
```

> | (a)-[r*..5 {name: 'Filipa'}]->(b) | (a) (()-[r {name: 'Filipa'}]->()){1,5} (b)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| (a)-[r*..5 {name: 'Filipa'}]\->(b) | (a) \(()-[r {name: 'Filipa'}]\->()){1,5} (b)
```

|===

| a = c | b = d | size(r)

| FALSE | FALSE | 1

3+d|Rows: 1
|===

The variable `r` can be reversed in order like any list, and made to match the switch in relationship pattern direction:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (a {name: 'Filipa'})<-[r*1..2]-(b)
WITH a, b, reverse(r) AS s
MATCH (c)-[s*1..2]->(d)
RETURN a = d, b = c, size(s)
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===

| a = d | b = c | size()

| TRUE | TRUE | 1
| TRUE | TRUE | 2

3+d|Rows: 2

|===

Changing the bounds on subsequent `MATCH` statements will mean that only the overlapping lengths of the quantifier bounds will produce results:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (a {name: 'Filipa'})<-[r*1..2]-(b)
MATCH (c)<-[r*2..3]-(d)
RETURN a = c, b = d, size(r)
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===

| a = c | b = d | size(r)

| TRUE | TRUE | 2

3+d|Rows: 1

|===

Because Cypher only allows paths to traverse a relationship once (see xref:patterns/reference.adoc#graph-patterns-rules-relationship-uniqueness[relationship uniqueness]), repeating a variable-length relationship in the same graph pattern will yield no results.

> For example, this `MATCH` query will never return any results:

Reviewer: As this is not a valid query on its own, I think 'clause' should be used instead of 'query'. Although I can't support that with any existing definitions of 'statement', 'clause' or 'query' in the documentation.

Author: If we use clause, should we change the sentence accordingly:
"this `MATCH` clause will never pass on any intermediate results to subsequent clauses"

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (x)-[r*1..2]->(y)-[r*1..2]->(z)
----

Attempting to repeat a variable-length relationship in a single relationship pattern will raise an error.
For example, this is not valid:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (x)-[r*1..2]->(y)-[r]->(z)
----

[[variable-length-relationships-examples]]
=== Examples

> The following pattern matches paths starting with nodes labeled `A` and ending with nodes labeled `B`, that traverse between 2 and 3 relationships of type `R`:

Reviewer: What is the house style on numbers? In the current Patterns chapter, numbers are written as digits. But in other parts of the documentation they are written as words. Are they digits for variable length bounds so the reader can quickly trace from the query to the number in the text? Or is it an oversight?

Author: Numbers up to 12 should be written as words, and after as digits. We are working on a style-guide currently where this will be formalised, but for now I will change it in this chapter.

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[r:R*2..3]->(:B)
----

The following traverses relationships of type `R` or `S` or `T` exactly 5 times:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[r:R|S|T*5]->()
----

The following traverses any relationship between 0 and 5 times, with the path beginning at nodes labeled `A` and ending at nodes labeled `B`.
Note that this will also return all nodes that have both labels `A` and `B` for the case where 0 relationships are traversed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[*0..5]->(:B)
----

> If the lower bound is removed, it will default to 1, and will no longer return paths of length zero, i.e., single nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the lower bound is removed, it will default to 1, and will no longer return paths of length zero, i.e. single nodes:
```

----

But this would not be allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n)-[r]->+(m WHERE r.p = m.q)
----

[[graph-patterns-rules-relationship-uniqueness]]
==== Relationship uniqueness

A relationship can only be traversed once in a given match for a graph pattern. The same restriction doesn't hold for nodes, which may be re-traversed any number of times in a match. 

[[graph-patterns-rules-equijoin]]
==== Equijoin

_Equijoins were introduced in Neo4j 5.7._

If a node variable is declared more than once in a path pattern, it is expressing an equijoin.
This is an operation that requires that each node pattern with the same node variable be bound to the same node.
For example, the following pattern refers to the same node twice with the variable `a`, forming a cycle:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a)-->(b)-->(c)-->(a)
----

The following pattern refers to the same node with variable `b` in different path patterns of the same graph pattern, forming a "T" shaped pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a)-->(b)-->(c), (b)-->(e)
----

Equijoins can only be made using variables outside of quantified path patterns.
The following would not be a valid equijoin:

[source, role=noheader]
----

> (a)-->(b)-->(c), ((b)-->(e))+(:X)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(a)-->(b)-->(c), ((b)-->(e))+ (:X)
```

[[graph-patterns-examples]]
=== Examples

The `WHERE` clause can refer to variables inside and outside of quantified path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a)-->(b)-->(c), (b) ((d)-->(e))+ WHERE any(n in d WHERE n.p = a.p)
----

An equijoin can be formed to match "H" shaped graphs:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-->(x)--(:B), (x)-[:R]->+(y), (:C)-->(y)-->(:D)
----

With no variables in common, this graph pattern will result in a Cartesian join between the sets of matches for the two path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a)-->(b)-->(c), ((d)-->(e))+
----

Multiple equijoins can be formed between path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X)-->(a:A)-[!:R]->+(b:B)-->(:Y), (a)-[:R]->+(b)
----

Variables declared in a previous `MATCH` can be referenced inside of a quantified path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n {p = 'ABC'})
MATCH (n)-->(m:A)-->(:B), (m) (()-[r WHERE r.p <> n.p]->())+ (:C)
----

The repetition of a relationship variable in the following yields no solutions due to Cypher enforcing relationship uniqueness within a match for a graph pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH ()-[r]->()-->(), ()-[r]-()
----

> [[juxtaposition]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[node-pattern-pairs]]
```

> == Juxtaposition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Node pattern pairs
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not valid syntax to write a pair of node patterns next to each other. For example, all of the following would raise a syntax error:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a:A)(b:B)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(a:A)(b:B)<-[r:R]-(c:C)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(a:A)<--(b:B)(c:C)-->(d:C)
----

However, the placing of pairs of node patterns next to each other is valid where it results indirectly from the expansion of quantified path patterns.
```

Adding changes following from removal of the term 'juxtaposition'.

[[juxtaposition-iterations]]
=== Iterations of quantified path patterns

Juxtaposition is the operation whereby node patterns that are adjacent to each other in a path pattern are merged.
Directly writing node patterns next to each other in a path pattern is not permitted, but instead results indirectly as a result of chaining together the iterations of a quantified path pattern.

> The end node patterns of each iteration are then merged with any adjacent node patterns, which could be either node patterns from another path pattern, or from a node pattern from another iteration of the same quantified path pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a quantified path pattern is expanded, the fixed path pattern contained in its parentheses is repeated and chained. This results in pairs of node patterns sitting next to each other.
```

Take the following quantified path pattern as an example:

[source, role=noheader]
----
((x:X)<--(y:Y)){3}
----

> Conceptually, the above is expanded as part of the matching process by repeating the path pattern contained in the outer parentheses three times is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is expanded by repeating the fixed path pattern `(x:X)<--(y:Y)` three times, with indices on the variables to show that no equijoin is implied (see (xref::patterns/reference.adoc#equijoins[equijoins])):
```

[source, role=noheader]
----
(x1:X)<--(y1:Y)(x2:X)<--(y2:Y)(x3:X)<--(y3:Y)
----

As a result two pairs of node patterns end up juxtaposed with each other: `(y1:Y)(x2:X)` and `(y2:Y)(x3:X)`.
During the matching process, each pair of juxtaposed node patterns will match the same nodes, and those nodes will satisfy the conjunction of the predicates in the node patterns.
For the first pair, both `y1` and `x2` will bind to the same node, and that node will both have label `X` and label `Y`.

> This expansion and juxtaposition is depicted in the following diagram:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is that two pairs of node patterns end up adjoining each other, `(y1:Y)(x2:X)` and `(y2:Y)(x3:X)`. 
During the matching process, each pair of node patterns will match the same nodes, and those nodes will satisfy the conjunction of the predicates in the node patterns. 
For example, in the first pair both `y1` and `x2` will bind to the same node, and that node must have labels `X` and `Y`.

This expansion and binding is depicted in the following diagram:
```

image::patterns_juxtaposition.svg[width="500", role="middle"]

[[juxtaposition-simple-path-patterns-and-quantified-path-patterns]]
=== Simple path patterns and quantified path patterns

> Juxtaposition also comes about when a simple path pattern is placed next to a quantified path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pairs of node patterns are also generated when a simple path pattern is placed next to a quantified path.
```

For example, consider the following path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[:R]->(:B) ((:X)<--(:Y)){1,2}
----

> After expanding the iterations of the quantified path pattern, the right-hand node pattern `(:B)` is juxtaposed with the left-hand node pattern `(:X)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After expanding the iterations of the quantified path pattern, the right-hand node pattern `(:B)` adjoins the left-hand node pattern `(:X)`.
```

The result will match the same paths as the union of matches of the following two path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[:R]->(:B&X)<--(:Y)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[:R]->(:B&X)<--(:Y&X)<--(:Y)
----

> If the simple path pattern is on the right of the quantified path pattern, its leftmost node `(:A)` is merged with the rightmost node `(:Y)` of the last iteration of the quantified path pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the simple path pattern is on the right of the quantified path pattern, its leftmost node `(:A)` adjoins the rightmost node `(:Y)` of the last iteration of the quantified path pattern.
```

For example, the following:

[source, role=noheader]
----
((:X)<--(:Y)){1,2} (:A)-[:R]->(:B)
----

will match the same paths as the union of the following two path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X)<--(:Y&A)-[:R]->(:B)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X)<--(:Y&X)<--(:Y&A)-[:R]->(:B)
----

[[juxtaposition-adjacent-quantified-path-patterns]]

> === Adjacent quantified path patterns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Pairs of quantified path patterns
```

> When two quantified path patterns are juxtaposed, the rightmost node of the last iteration of the first pattern is merged with the leftmost node of the first iteration of the second pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When two quantified path patterns adjoin, the rightmost node of the last iteration of the first pattern is merged with the leftmost node of the first iteration of the second pattern.
```

> For example, the following juxtaposition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following adjoining patterns:
```

[source, role=noheader]
----
((:A)-[:R]->(:B)){2} ((:X)<--(:Y)){1,2}
----

will match the same set of paths as the union of the paths matched by these two path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[:R]->(:B&A)-[:R]->(:B&X)<--(:Y)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[:R]->(:B&A)-[:R]->(:B&X)<--(:Y&X)<--(:Y)
----

> 

Reviewer: [[juxtaposition-zero-iterations]]
=== Zero iterations

> If the quantifier allows for zero iterations of a pattern, for example `{0,3}` or `*`, then the 0th iteration of that pattern is the juxtaposition of the nodes on both sides of the quantified path pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the quantifier allows for zero iterations of a pattern, for example {0,3}, then the 0th iteration of that pattern results in the node patterns on either side pairing up. 
```

This edit removes references to Kleene star as well as 'juxtaposition'.

For example, the following path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X) ((a:A)-[:R]->(b:B)){0,1} (:Y)
----

will match the same set of paths as the union of the paths matched by the following two path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X&Y)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X&A)-[:R]->(:B&Y)
----

[[juxtaposition-forbidden-juxtapositions]]
=== Forbidden juxtapositions

Juxtaposition is only permitted when at least one of the path patterns being juxtaposed is a quantified path pattern. The following juxtapositions of simple path patterns are not valid:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(a:A)(b:B)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(a:A)(b:B)<-[r:R]-(c:C)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(a:A)<--(b:B)(c:C)-->(d:C)

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----

The value expression can be any expression as listed in the chapter on xref:syntax/expressions.adoc[expressions], except for path patterns (which will throw a syntax error) and regular expressions (which will be treated as string literals).
An empty property key-value expression matches all elements.
Property key-value expressions can be combined with a `WHERE` clause.

[[property-key-value-expressions-examples]]
=== Examples

Matches all nodes with property `p` = `10`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
({ p: 10 })
----

Matches all relationships with property `p` = `10` and `q` equal to date `2023-02-10`:
[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[{ p: 10, q: date("2023-02-10") }]-()
----

Matches all relationships with its property `p` equal to the property `p` of its source node:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(s)-[{ p: s.p }]-()
----

Matches all nodes with property `p` = `10` and property `q` greater than `100`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n { p: 10 } WHERE n.q > 100)
----

[[path-patterns]]
== Path patterns

A path pattern is the top level pattern that is matched against paths in a graph.

[[path-patterns-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----

> pathPattern ::= [{ simplePathPattern | quantifiedPathPattern }]+
> simplePathPattern ::= nodePattern 
>   [ { relationshipPattern | quantifiedRelationship } nodePattern ]*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pathPattern ::= [{ simplePathPattern | quantifiedPathPattern }]+

simplePathPattern ::= nodePattern 
  [ { relationshipPattern | quantifiedRelationship } nodePattern ]*
```
Add line break for consistent formatting.

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A) ((a)<-[s:X WHERE a.p = s.p]-(b)){,5}
----

A variable that was introduced in a previous clause can be referenced as long as that variable was defined outside of a quantified path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
MATCH (n)
MATCH ()-[r WHERE r.q = n.q]-() (()<-[s:X WHERE n.p = s.p]-()){2,3}
----

[[quantified-path-patterns]]
== Quantified path patterns

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A quantified path pattern represents a xref::patterns/reference.adoc#path-patterns[path pattern] repeated a number of times in a given range.
It is composed of a path pattern, representing the path section to be repeated, followed by a xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantifiers[quantifier], constraining the number of repetitions between a lower bound and an upper bound.

image::patterns_qpp_reference.svg[width="500", role="middle"]

For information about an alternative version of patterns for matching paths of variable length, see xref::patterns/reference.adoc#variable-length-relationships
[variable-length relationships].

[[quantified-path-patterns-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----

> quantifiedPathPattern ::= 
>   "(" fixedPath [ "WHERE" booleanExpression ] ")" quantifier
> fixedPath ::= nodePattern [ relationshipPattern nodePattern ]+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quantifiedPathPattern ::= 
  "(" fixedPath [ "WHERE" booleanExpression ] ")" quantifier
  
fixedPath ::= nodePattern [ relationshipPattern nodePattern ]+
```

For example, the following quantified relationship:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()-[r]->{m,n}()
----

is equivalent to the following quantified path pattern, with empty node patterns on either side:

[source, role=noheader]
----
() (()-[r]->()){m,n} ()
----

However, unlike a quantified path pattern, a quantified relationship must always have a node pattern on each side.

[[quantified-relationship-examples]]
=== Examples

Matches paths starting with nodes labeled `A` and ending with nodes labeled `B`, that traverse between two and three relationships of type `R`:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[r:R]->{2,3}(:B)
----

This is equivalent to the following:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A) (()-[r:R]->()){2,3} (:B)
----

Matches paths with one or more relationships of any direction and any type:

[source, role=noheader]
----
()--+()
----

[[quantifiers]]
== Quantifiers

The quantifiers here only refer to those used in xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-path-patterns[quantified path patterns] and xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-relationships[quantified relationships].

[[quantifiers-syntax]]
=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----

> quantifier ::= 
>   "*" | "+" | fixedQuantifier | generalQuantifier
> fixedQuantifier ::= "{" unsignedInteger "}"
> generalQuantifier ::= "{" lowerBound "," upperBound "}"
> lowerBound ::= unsignedInteger
> upperBound ::= unsignedInteger
> unsignedInteger ::= [0-9]+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quantifier ::= 
  "*" | "+" | fixedQuantifier | generalQuantifier
  
fixedQuantifier ::= "{" unsignedInteger "}"

generalQuantifier ::= "{" lowerBound "," upperBound "}"

lowerBound ::= unsignedInteger

upperBound ::= unsignedInteger

unsignedInteger ::= [0-9]+
```

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n)-->(m:A)-->(:B), (m)-[r WHERE r.p <> n.p]->(:C)
----

But this is not allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n)-->(m:A)-->(:B), (m) (()-[r WHERE r.p <> n.p]->())+ (:C)
----

A variable can be referred to inside a quantified path pattern if it has already been bound in a previous `MATCH` clause.
If a variable is declared inside a quantified path pattern, then it can be treated as a singleton only from within the quantified path pattern it was declared in.
Outside of that quantified path pattern, it must be treated as a group variable.
For example, this would be allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
((n)-[r]->(m WHERE r.p = m.q))+
----

As would this:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n)-[r]->+(m WHERE all(rel in r WHERE rel.q > m.q))
----

But this would not be allowed:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(n)-[r]->+(m WHERE r.p = m.q)
----

[[graph-patterns-rules-relationship-uniqueness]]
==== Relationship uniqueness

A relationship can only be traversed once in a given match for a graph pattern. The same restriction doesn't hold for nodes, which may be re-traversed any number of times in a match. 

[[graph-patterns-rules-equijoin]]
==== Equijoin

> _Equijoins were introduced in Neo4j 5.7._

Reviewer 2: I guess we started calling it that in 5.7, and even then that's a bit of a stretch. I'd argue that it's been in Cypher forever(?).

Author: Ah, Ok. I misunderstood. Then I will delete the release version notice.

----
(:X)<--(:Y&X)<--(:Y&A)-[:R]->(:B)
----

[[node-pattern-pairs-pairs-of-quantified-path-patterns]]
=== Pairs of quantified path patterns
When two quantified path patterns adjoin, the rightmost node of the last iteration of the first pattern is merged with the leftmost node of the first iteration of the second pattern.
For example, the following adjoining patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
((:A)-[:R]->(:B)){2} ((:X)<--(:Y)){1,2}
----

will match the same set of paths as the union of the paths matched by these two path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[:R]->(:B&A)-[:R]->(:B&X)<--(:Y)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(:A)-[:R]->(:B&A)-[:R]->(:B&X)<--(:Y&X)<--(:Y)
----

If the quantifier allows for zero iterations of a pattern, for example `{0,3}` or `*`, then the 0th iteration of that pattern results in the node patterns on either side pairing up.
For example, the following path pattern:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X) ((a:A)-[:R]->(b:B)){0,1} (:Y)
----

will match the same set of paths as the union of the paths matched by the following two path patterns:

[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X&Y)
----
[source, role=noheader]
----
(:X&A)-[:R]->(:B&Y)

> ----

Reviewer 2: This is repeated underneath

= Syntax and semantics

This section contains reference material for looking up the syntax and semantics of specific elements of Graph Pattern Matching. 

[[reference-node-pattern]]
== Node pattern

A node pattern is a pattern that matches a single node.
It can be used on its own in a clause such as `MATCH` or `EXIST`, or form part of a xref:patterns/reference.adoc#reference-path-pattern[path pattern]. 

See also xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#node-patterns[node pattern concepts].

=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
nodePattern ::= "(" [ nodeVariable ] [ labelExpression ] 

>     [ propertyKeyValueExpression ] [ "WHERE" booleanExpression ] ")"

Reviewer: Is it possible to make labelExpression and propertyKeyValueExpression links?

Author: I thought this would be a simple fix, but that's not the case. It may have to be used with asciidoc 'callouts' - a kind of footnote system for source blocks. I will investigate a bit more to see if we can get a regular xref within the source block working.

patternFiller ::= [ relationshipVariable ] [ typeExpression ] 
    [ propertyKeyValueExpression ] [ "WHERE" booleanExpression ]
----

Note that the syntax for type expressions in relationship patterns is the same as for label expressions in node patterns.

For rules on valid relationship variable names, see the xref:syntax/naming.adoc[Cypher naming rules].

=== Rules

==== Predicates

The following three types of predicate can be specified in the pattern filler of a full relationship pattern (i.e. a pattern with the square brackets):

* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#reference-label-expression[label expression]
* xref:patterns/reference.adoc#reference-property-key-value-expression[property key-value expression] 
* xref:clauses/where.adoc[WHERE clause]

A fourth type of predicate specifies the directionality of the relationship with respect to the overall path pattern, using the less-than or greater-than symbols to form arrows (`<` and `>`). 
If a relationship pattern has no arrows, it will match relationships of any direction. 

The boolean expression of the `WHERE` clause can reference any variables within scope of the relationship pattern.

> A relationship variable needs to be declared in the pattern in order to reference in the boolean expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A relationship variable needs to be declared in the pattern in order to reference it in the boolean expression.
```

== Label expression

The following applies to both the label expressions of node patterns and the type expressions of relationship patterns.

A label expression is a boolean predicate composed from label names and a wildcard symbol using disjunction, conjunction, negation and grouping. 
A label expression returns true when it matches the set of labels for a node.

Although relationships have a type rather than labels, the syntax for expressions matching a relationship type is identical to that of label expressions. 

=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
labelExpression ::= ":" labelTerm

labelTerm ::=
    labelIdentifier
  | labelTerm "&" labelTerm
  | labelTerm "|" labelTerm
  | "!" labelTerm 
  | "%" 
  | "(" labelTerm ")"
----

For valid label identifiers, see the xref:syntax/naming.adoc[Cypher naming rules].

=== Rules

The following table lists the symbols used in label expressions:

[options="header",cols="a,3a,a"]
|===
| Symbol | Description | Precedence

| `%` 
| Wildcard.
Evaluates to `true` if the label set is non-empty 
| 

| `()`
| Contained expression is evaluated before evaluating the outer expression the group is contained in. 

> | 1 (hightest)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1 (highest)
```

|===

As relationships have exactly one type each, this expression will never match a relationship:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[:A&B]->
----

Similarly, the following will always match a relationship:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[:%]->
----

The use of negation can make the conjunction useful in relationship patterns. 
The following matches relationships that have type that is neither A nor B:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
-[:!A&!B]->
----

[[reference-property-key-value-expression]]
== Property key-value expression

=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
propertyKeyValueExpression ::= 
  "{" propertyKeyValuePairList "}"

propertyKeyValuePairList ::= 
  propertyKeyValuePair [ "," propertyKeyValuePair ]

propertyKeyValuePair ::= propertyName ":" valueExpression
----

=== Rules

The property key-value expression is treated as a conjunction of equalities on the properties of the element that the containing pattern matches. 

For example, the following node pattern:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
({ p: valueExp1, q: valueExp2 })
----

Is equivalent to the following node pattern with a `WHERE` clause:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----

> (n WHERE n.p = valueExp1 AND n.q: valueExp2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(n WHERE n.p = valueExp1 AND n.q = valueExp2)
```

----

The value expression can be any expression as listed in the chapter on xref:syntax/expressions.adoc[expressions], except for path patterns (which will throw a syntax error) and regular expressions (which will be treated as string literals).
An empty property key-value expression matches all elements.

=== Examples

The following matches all nodes with property `p` = `10`:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
({ p: 10 })
----

The following matches all relationships with property `p` = `10` and `q` equal to date `2023-02-10`:
[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----

> ()-[({ p: 10, q: date("2023-02-10") }]-()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
()-[{ p: 10, q: date("2023-02-10") }]-()
```

----

The following matches all relationships with its property `p` equal to the property `p` of its source node:

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----

> (s)-[({ p: s.p }]-()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(s)-[{ p: s.p }]-()
```

= Syntax and semantics

This section contains reference material for looking up the syntax and semantics of specific elements of Graph Pattern Matching. 

[[reference-node-pattern]]
== Node pattern

A node pattern is a pattern that matches a single node.
It can be used on its own in a clause such as `MATCH` or `EXIST`, or form part of a xref:patterns/reference.adoc#reference-path-pattern[path pattern]. 

See also xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#node-patterns[node pattern concepts].

=== Syntax

[source, syntax, role=noheader]
----
nodePattern ::= "(" [ nodeVariable ] [ labelExpression ] // <1>
    [ propertyKeyValueExpression ] [ "WHERE" booleanExpression ] ")" // <2>
----

<1> See the section on xref:patterns/reference.adoc#reference-label-expression[label expressions] for more information. 

> <2> See the section on xref:patterns/reference.adoc#reference-property-key-value-expression[property key value expressions] for more information. 

Reviewer: Given that links embedded in code aren't possible, I think just leave it as is. This adds too much noise in order to introduce a link to a header that will just appear on the left hand navigation panel anyway.
